Used Vehicle Auction Model	2021 – 2023

Conceived and created a data-driven online auction bidding model for a startup, considering used-vehicle market dynamics and vehicle conditions, allowing the customer to modify bid parameters for their purchasing preferences.

I created a prediction model for used vehicle sale prices based on market trends by using data scraped from dealerships across the country. The data was organized into a relational database (BigQuery PostgreSQL) and was updated daily. My model used updated market data to identify trends in the used car market, both countrywide and for a locality, to predict price quantiles given year, make, model, trim, VIN, mileage, color, and more. Outlying clusters of vehicles are identified for the feature that causes deviation, so that information can be used when applying the model transformed data, while outliers due to erroneous data were removed. The known negative correlation between listing price and mileage is not sufficient (low R-value) for linear regression. For example, low mileage vehicles rapidly lose value, while high mileage vehicles maintain some value because they can be sold for parts. I used isotonic regression as the foundation of price prediction model, modifying significantly to smooth (no price drops) and create price quantiles so bid prices can be modified based on local market and dealership preferences.

The model was then connected to the ACV Auctions API to scan the active auctions for vehicles on a watchlist. Once identified, the particular condition of a vehicle was assessed by applying filters to nearly 100 possible conditions of the vehicle. Working with dealerships and industry insiders, we learned how potential customers approach an auction: heuristics, special case considerations, identifying vehicles that can be profitable after repair, and more. Working with developers in a Scrum as the product owner, we created an online user interface. Customers could specify acceptable conditions and price deductions, as most dealerships have a niche for repairs on used vehicles that can generate significant profit. Once the vehicle is identified as suitable for purchase, we offered automated bidding and auction reports via email (yagmail) and text (Twilio).

